DOCSP-44849: modify results (#59)
mongodb/docs-mongoid: source/interact-data/modify-results.txt

.. _mongoid-data-modify-results:

====================
Modify Query Results
====================

.. facet::
   :name: genre
   :values: reference

.. meta::
   :keywords: ruby framework, odm, crud, print results, code example

.. contents:: On this page
   :local:
   :backlinks: none
   :depth: 2
   :class: singlecol

Overview
--------

In this guide, you can learn how to customize the way that {+odm+}

> returns results to you from queries. MongoDB allows you to perform the

Reviewer: S:

```suggestion
returns results from queries. MongoDB allows you to perform the
```

following actions to modify the way that results appear:

- :ref:`mongoid-data-projection`

- :ref:`mongoid-data-sort`

- :ref:`mongoid-data-skip-limit`

Sample Data
~~~~~~~~~~~

The examples in this guide use the ``Band`` model, which represents a
band or musical group. The definition of the ``Band`` model might be
different for each section to demonstrate different query

> functionalities. Some sections might also use the ``Manager`` model,

Reviewer: S: can probably just say they do use it

```suggestion
functionalities. Some sections also use the ``Manager`` model,
```

> which represents a person who manages a given band, or a ``Tour`` model, which
> represents live performances by a certain band or musical group.

Reviewer: S: would be consistent across lines

```suggestion
which represents a person who manages a given band, or a ``Tour`` model, which
represents live performances by a given band.
```

.. _mongoid-data-projection:

Return Specified Fields
-----------------------

> In MongoDB, the process of specifying fields to include or exclude from
> results is called *projection*. {+odm+} provides the following operators

Reviewer: S:

```suggestion
In MongoDB, *projection* is the process of specifying fields to include or exclude from
results. {+odm+} provides the following operators
```

.. literalinclude:: /includes/interact-data/modify-results.rb
   :start-after: start-only
   :end-before: end-only
   :language: ruby
   :dedent:

.. note:: _id Field

   In MongoDB, the ``_id`` field is included in results even if you do
   not explicitly include it.

If you attempt to reference attributes that have not been loaded,
{+odm+} raises a ``Mongoid::Errors::AttributeNotLoaded`` error.

You can also use the ``only()`` method to include fields from embedded
documents. 

Consider that the ``Band`` model embeds multiple ``Tour`` objects. You can
project fields from the ``Tour`` model such as ``year``, as shown in the
following code:

.. literalinclude:: /includes/interact-data/modify-results.rb
   :start-after: start-only-embed
   :end-before: end-only-embed
   :language: ruby
   :dedent:

Then, you can access the embedded fields from the returned documents:

.. code-block:: ruby
   
   # Returns the first Tour object from
   # the first Band in the results
   bands.first.tours.first

You can pass fields of referenced associations to the ``only()`` method,
but the projection is ignored when loading the embedded objects. {+odm+}

> loads all fields of the referenced associations.

Reviewer: Q: might be my lack of ruby experience, but i'm still not sure i understand this paragraph. will ruby people get it?

Author: It means that even if you project only one field of an embedded document, the whole thing will load when you access it from the result. I can reword

.. note::

   If you are connected to a deployment running MongoDB 4.4 or later,
   you cannot specify an association and its fields in a projection in
   the same query.

> If a document has ``has_one`` or ``has_and_belongs_to_many``

Reviewer: S: avoid double "has"

```suggestion
If a document contains [or uses or whatever] ``has_one`` or ``has_and_belongs_to_many``
```

> If a document has ``has_one`` or ``has_and_belongs_to_many``
> associations, you must include the fields with foreign keys in the list
> of attributes loaded when using ``only()`` for those associations to be
> loaded.

Reviewer: S: had a hard time parsing this paragraph, but gave rewriting a shot

```suggestion
If a document has ``has_one`` or ``has_and_belongs_to_many``
associations, and you want {+odm+} to load those associations when
you call the ``only()`` method,
you must include the fields with foreign keys in the list
of attributes.
```

   class Band
     include Mongoid::Document
     field :name, type: String
     has_and_belongs_to_many :managers
   end

   class Manager
     include Mongoid::Document
     has_and_belongs_to_many :bands
   end

The following code demonstrates how {+odm+} can load the associated
``Manager`` objects if you include the ``manager_ids`` field:

.. literalinclude:: /includes/interact-data/modify-results.rb
   :start-after: start-only-embed-association
   :end-before: end-only-embed-association
   :language: ruby
   :dedent:

Exclude Fields
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

You can explicitly exclude fields from results by using the
``without()`` method.

The following code excludes the ``year`` field from returned ``Band``
objects:

.. literalinclude:: /includes/interact-data/modify-results.rb
   :start-after: start-without
   :end-before: end-without
   :language: ruby
   :dedent:

.. important:: _id Field

   {+odm+} requires the ``_id`` field for various operations, so you
   *cannot* exclude the ``_id`` field or the ``id`` alias from results.
   If you pass ``_id`` or ``id`` to the ``without()`` method, {+odm+}
   ignores it.

.. _mongoid-data-sort:

Sort Results
------------

> You can sort the order that {+odm+} returns documents by using the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can sort the order in which {+odm+} returns documents by using the
```

``order()`` and ``order_by()`` methods.

These methods accept a hash that indicates which fields to order the
documents by, and whether to use an ascending or descending order for
each field.

> You can specify the sort direction in the following ways:

Reviewer: S: Love the code examples for each sort variation, but seems useful to give a little more context. E.g.: "The following examples show different ways to sort by the `name` and `year` fields."

It also took me a minute to understand these examples. Seems like you can choose the sort order by passing a number or a symbol or a string? I wonder if making that point explicitly would be helpful, and possibly organizing the info in a table or something. I assume users should also be picking just one of these methods and sticking with it, to keep their code consistent. Could be a good tip to add.

- Integers ``1`` (ascending) and ``-1`` (descending)
  - Example: ``Band.order(name: 1, year: -1)``

- Symbols ``:asc`` and ``:desc``
  - Example: ``Band.order(name: :asc)``

- Strings ``"asc"`` and ``"desc"``
  - Example: ``Band.order_by(name: "asc", year: "desc")``

The ``order()`` method also accepts the following sort specifications:

- Array of two-element arrays:

  - Strings
    - Example: ``Band.order([['name', 'asc'], ['year', 'desc']])``

  - Symbols
    - Example: ``Band.order([[:name, :asc]])``

- ``asc`` and ``desc`` methods on symbols
  - Example: ``Band.order(:name.asc, :year.desc)``

- SQL syntax
  - Example: ``Band.order('name desc')``

> You can also use the ``asc()`` and ``desc()`` methods instead of using

Reviewer: S: I'd consider making order, order_by, and asc/desc their own subsections

``order()``:

.. code-block:: ruby

   Band.asc('name').desc('year')

If you chain sort specifications, the first call defines the most
significant criteria and the newest call defines the least significant

> one.

Reviewer: Q: does most/least significant mean the order in which ruby will try to sort the fields by (sort the most significant, then second most, etc.)? I just haven't heard these terms before.

Author: Ill reword

.. TODO update link in the following note for scope

.. note:: Sorting in Scopes

   If you define a scope on your model that includes a sort specification,

>    the scope sort takes precedence over the sort specified in a query, as the

Reviewer: I: [as](https://www.mongodb.com/docs/meta/style-guide/terminology/alphabetical-terms/#a:~:text=Don%27t%20use%20as%20or%20since%20when%20describing%20the%20reason%20for%20a%20situation%2C%20event%2C%20and%20so%20on.%20Use%20because%20instead.)

```suggestion
   the scope sort takes precedence over the sort specified in a query, because the
```

   default scope is evaluated first.

.. _mongoid-data-skip-limit:

Paginate Results
----------------

{+odm+} provides the ``limit()``, ``skip()``, and ``batch_size()``

> pagination operators that you can use on ``Criteria`` objects. The

Reviewer: Q: operators vs methods?

Author: They are interchangeable

following sections describe how to use these operators.

Limit Number of Results
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> You can limit the number of results that {+odm+} returns by using the
> ``limit()`` method.

Reviewer: S: slight ambiguity between you using the limit() method and mongoid using it

```suggestion
You can use the ``limit()`` method to limit the number of results that {+odm+} returns.
```

The following code retrieves a maximum of ``5`` documents:

.. literalinclude:: /includes/interact-data/modify-results.rb
   :start-after: start-limit
   :end-before: end-limit
   :language: ruby
   :dedent:

Skip Results
~~~~~~~~~~~~

You can skip a specified number of results by using the ``skip()``

> method, or its alias ``offset()``. If you chain a ``limit()`` call, it
> is applied after documents are skipped. 

Reviewer: S: might be useful to have an example or admonition for this, actually! probably a common question.

```suggestion
method, or its alias ``offset()``. If you chain a ``limit()`` call
to the ``skip()`` method, the limit
is applied after documents are skipped. 
```
